I want you to hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain what
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits have rolled in 2018
annihilation was released around the
world on Netflix and on a limited basis
in US theaters becoming a critical
success and leaving a lot of people
confused by its finale written and
directed by Alex Garland the filmmaker
behind ex machina annihilation was
loosely adapted from the novel of the
same name released in 2014 from writer
Jeff Vandermeer garland reportedly
adapted the novel from memory and the
book was actually the first of three
installments with authority and
acceptance both following shortly after
annihilations release comprising the
southern reach trilogy the film follows
Natalie Portman's character Lena an
ex-soldier and cellular biologist who is
grieving the loss of her husband Caine
played by Oscar Isaac who has been
missing having assumed he was dead
Lena is blown away to find him turning
up to their house one night but notably
he seems different distant he becomes
ill and is brought in by the government
along with Lena and she learns that he
was sent out on a mission inside an
unexplainable area of lights that has
been growing on the southern coast of
the US the electromagnetic field has
been expanding for three years and has
been dubbed the shimmer no one who has
gone inside have returned except for
Caine Lena decides to join a crew of
women all seemingly aware of the
likelihood they'll never return in to
the shimmer hoping to learn more about
her husband's condition and what
happened to him insider things appear
normal at first but the group's start
losing track of time and encounters
strange
abnormalities within the shimmer being a
biologist Lena realizes that the entire
area has become mutated on a molecular
level with the DNA of every living thing
inside the shimmer changing at random at
the beginning of the film we see Lena in
interrogation after coming back from the
shimmer where she remembers little of
what happened then we see the origin of
the shimmer on earth an object of light
approaching Earth from outer space and
landing at a lighthouse by the sea as
the group explore further into the
shimmer the mutations grow more extreme
and eventually the women themselves
start to change with one member of the
crew josie deciding to accept her fate
as becoming one with the shimmer as
plant life begins to grow from her body
mimicking the human shaped plants that
have grown from the ground she was the
one who figured out that the shimmer
refract DNA and is a prism that changes
everything that enters its dr. Ventress
who's leading the group played by
Jennifer Jason Leigh believes that the
shimmer is destroying everything but
Lena believes that the shimmer is
changing everything in the end only Lena
and Ventress remain and they both reach
the lighthouse where the shimmer first
touched down on earth Ventress tells
Lena that whatever the entity there is
will grow until it encompasses
everything then this happens to her
[Music]
the thing of energy draws a drop of
Lina's blood towards it where it
duplicates and creates a humanoid shape
of matzah Lena engages in a showdown
with the creature which begins to mimic
her movements before attacking her
trying to assimilate itself into her
body
it's a hypnotic and breathtaking
sequence that ultimately concludes with
a perfect replica of Lena forming before
her very eyes before she kills it with a
grenade
escaping the lighthouse lena watches as
the building and indeed the entire
shimmer itself goes down in flames back
at the government facility lena is
reunited with cain who is now perfectly
healthy she asks him if he's really Cain
and he responds as the final scene of
the film roles I don't think so
are you Lena
[Music]
and that's annihilation the big question
is whether or not the Lina we see at the
end of the film and even the beginning
as the whole movie is framed around her
interrogation after coming back from the
shimmer is actually the real Lina or the
copy we learned through a video
recording in the lighthouse that Cain
actually killed himself
so the person who returns to Lina is a
replica of her husband call it whatever
you want a clone a copy a double so it's
established that the shimmer can create
a lifelike functioning human replica his
irises change as they hug at the end and
so do Lina's is she just like him and is
the shimmer still alive and well but
inside her and inside Cain there's the
possibility that she's still the real
Lina but a changed Lina she comes out
with a marking on her arm a snake eating
itself also representing the infinity
sign perhaps the destruction or the
annihilation of the shimmer was the
entity destroying itself to create a new
a different form a potential clue to
whether or not Lina is the real Lena or
the duplicate comes first when Cain
returns to her at the beginning of the
film we see his hand partially through a
glass of water on the table what we're
seeing is still his hand but through a
distortion of image his hand is there
beyond the water in the glass but it's
slightly different not the real thing
when Lina touches his hand we only see
this from the other side of the glass
seems innocuous enough but at the end of
the film and the conclusion of Lina's
interrogation we see her hand through a
glass of water also maybe a hint to the
similarity she now shares with her
husband shimmer created doppelganger and
if that's not enough note her hand
beyond the water it's reversed a mirror
image
the novel simply ends with the biologist
character deciding to remain in the
shimmer known in the book is area X
hoping to find the presence of her
husband Alex Garland's adaptation gives
the story a fairly definitive conclusion
with the open-ended final scene a mere
tease of an answer to what we just saw
an answer that we're never really going
to get the film has a lot to say without
saying a lot the kind of complex sci-fi
thinker that keeps people talking for
decades many have likened the story to a
metaphor for cancer others who look at
how we perceive death you can theorize
that Lina's own sense of self
annihilation colored by the fact that
she was actually cheating on Kane with a
co-worker was adapted and taken on by
the shimmer leading to its own demise or
depending on how you look at it it's own
rebirth anihilation is an incredibly
dark beautiful and thought-provoking
film that rewards rewatching and surely
cannot be definitively explained by one
theory alone because where would the fun
be in that
[Music]